RFC: Make React the Primary Framework (#32)
openmrs/openmrs-rfc-frontend: text/0032-react-primary-framework.md

# Making React the Primary Framework

- Start Date: 2021/11/26
- RFC PR: https://github.com/openmrs/openmrs-rfc-frontend/pull/32

## Decision, including impact on distributions

The app shell should already be developed using React, making React a first-class citizen. As such unnecessary framework-independent packages such as `single-spa` can be removed. Instead, `react-router` will be the central router.

Existing distributions / frontend modules should not be impacted - a compatibility layer will be introduced.

## Reason for decision

Right now every frontend module registers a couple of components (mostly "extensions" and "pages"). Each component will be rendered using a completely new rendering tree. This comes with some significant overhead as compared to reusing a single rendering tree.

> Since almost all of our components are React components and since in React its very easy to have a single rendering tree dispatching to multiple DOM nodes (using the `createPortal` API of React) we should move to using only a single React rendering tree. The other advantage is that the framework agnostic approach has problems with otherwise simple things such as prop updates. While this is fully integrated and highly optimized in React, the framework agnostic approach right now makes the update inefficient.

Reviewer: It would be good to have an empirically grounded estimate of the performance impact of this change.

> Since almost all of our components are React components and since in React its very easy to have a single rendering tree dispatching to multiple DOM nodes (using the `createPortal` API of React) we should move to using only a single React rendering tree. The other advantage is that the framework agnostic approach has problems with otherwise simple things such as prop updates. While this is fully integrated and highly optimized in React, the framework agnostic approach right now makes the update inefficient.

Reviewer: It would be good to have an empirically grounded estimate of the performance impact of this change—with respect to each of these two inefficiencies.

Reviewer: > the framework agnostic approach has problems with otherwise simple things such as prop updates

Are there examples other than prop updates, or can we simplify this?

> Since most of our components (>= 95%) are React components and since in React its very easy to have a single rendering tree dispatching to multiple DOM nodes (using the `createPortal` API of React) we should consider going to a single rendering tree of React. The other advantage is that the framework agnostic approach has problems with otherwise simple things such as prop updates. While this is fully integrated and highly optimized in React, the framework agnostic approach right now makes the update inefficient.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since almost all of our components are React components and since in React its very easy to have a single rendering tree dispatching to multiple DOM nodes (using the `createPortal` API of React) we should move to using only a single React rendering tree. The other advantage is that the framework agnostic approach has problems with otherwise simple things such as prop updates. While this is fully integrated and highly optimized in React, the framework agnostic approach right now makes the update inefficient.
```

Reviewer 2: To me, I think the more compelling reason for the second part of this (i.e., the advantage of utilizing React primarily vs the framework-agnostic approach) is a bit simpler: we're forcing the OpenMRS framework to duplicate pathways that are already highly optimized in React.

> Besides the performance part we would also see significant reduction in complexity. Right now developers need to think in multiple dimensions. For instance, the routing is happening on an *outside* level (using `single-spa`s router) and potentially even on an *inside* level (using, e.g., the `react-router`). While most of the time this works as expected, sometimes weird behavior is observed.

Reviewer 2: > sometimes weird behavior is observed

Do you have an example of this? For historical purposes, it's useful to have concrete examples of why we're rejecting an approach that we've pursued.

Reviewer: It seems like this is the main argument in favor of this change. As such I think it should be very clearly and concretely explained.

## Alternatives

There are some ways we can go alternatively, including:

> 1. As-is, but with enhancements to the `single-spa-react` connector (would have several downsides and would not provide all the optimizations we look for)

Reviewer 2: What downsides?

Author: For instance still having a router of router, which degrades developer and user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make enhancements to the `single-spa-react` connector. This would eliminate the unnecessary React render trees and allow React to handle props directly. Routing, however, would remain as it is currently.
```

> 2. Restricting frontend modules to React exclusively, so any module with components in another language needs either to convert or custom mount their framework / application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Restricting frontend modules to React exclusively, so any module with components in another framework needs either to convert or custom mount their framework / application
```

> The first way would be half-baked again, and comes with some drawbacks (frontend modules would still require recompilation here). The second way would be too much effort on the development side of frontend modules. Ideally, the current development model should not be interrupted in any way / significantly by this proposal.

Reviewer 2: I would migrate these explanations into the text of the alternatives above. I'd also drop the "half-baked" language. Just explain the drawbacks.

## Implementation guide

> In its core the implementation is straight forward. We create one React render tree in the `#app` element of the DOM. We'll have one global OpenMRS context just above everything with the `BrowserRouter` inside. The routes are determined by the pages inside the OpenMRS context, which enter the application through the standard registration. Therefore, instead of registering a page as an application in `single-spa`, these pages are registered in the OpenMRS context.

Reviewer 2: Does this require code changes to the frontend modules exposing pages?

Author: In the described way not. Maybe a recompilation is necessary but the whole proposal was made with backwards compatibility in mind (so it would just work).

Author: (Just to be clear: Changes should be applied to get the most out of it. But without any changes it will still work.)

Each registered component now has to be React component. In case of other frameworks that is still possible via a converter. In the spirit of the `single-spa` converters we can essentially use the same thing. All that's done is to return a React component much like the following code:

```jsx
function makeConverter({ onMount, onUpdate, onUnmount }) {
  const Converter = (props) => {
    const ref = React.useRef();
    const lifecycle = React.useRef('bootstrap');
    const deps = getDependencies(props);

    React.useEffect(() => {
      const node = ref.current;

      if (node && lifecycle.current === 'mounted') {
        onUpdate(node, props);
      }
    }, deps);

    React.useEffect(() => {
      const node = ref.current;

      if (node) {
        onMount(node, props);
        lifecycle.current = 'mounted';

        return () => {
          lifecycle.current = 'unmounting';
          onUnmount(node, props);
        }
      }
    }, []);

    return <div ref={ref} />;
  };
}
```

Such a generic higher-order component can be used to create converters, e.g., to bring Angular components to that world (where React is the primary framework).

> Another thing to consider is the use of `single-spa` converters such as `single-spa-react` or `single-spa-angular`. While the former is actually already hidden by default the latter is used, for instance, in the forms frontend module.

Reviewer 2: Ideally, an RFC should be explaining the decision and the way forward. Which of these various mechanism of integrating components from other frameworks do you recommend?

Author: The implementation guide was added by explicit demand.

It is possible to actually include a shim for this in the tooling. In Webpack it could look like this:

```js
module.exports = {
  // webpack config
  resolve: {
    alias: {
      'single-spa-angular': path.resolve(__dirname, 'shims', 'angular'),
    },
  },
};
```

where the locally placed file would export the same API as `single-spa-angular`, except that it would not export `SingleSpa.LifeCycles`, but rather `React.Component`:

```ts
export function singleSpaAngular(options) {
  const lc = createLifecycle(options);
  return makeConverter(lc);
}
```

The `createLifecycle` could be very similar to the existing implementation. Alternatively, the original `single-spa-angular` is kept in place, and instead the `makeConverter` is called implicitly in these scenarios.

> Finally, the use of some APIs such as `navigate` needs to be adjusted.

Reviewer 2: How so?

Author: Because they work against the router from single-spa.

Reviewer: That makes sense, @FlorianRappl . A related question: how will non-React apps trigger navigation? e.g. if I have an Angular microfrontend that links to the home page, how does it work?

Author: `history` is framework agnostic.

## Common practices (not enforced)

> With the new change nested / (React) routers in the frontend modules don't need to be created. The routing context remains the same, as the (React) components are running in the same React tree.

Reviewer 2: One thing I haven't understood from this: is it possible for a component to declare a new router?

Author: You can always do that. The question is "do you have to do it". Right now we have to, but with the given proposal we would not have to do it for React.

> Another new possibility is that the styleguide can now exclusively commit to React component. Things such as the notifications won't require a "wrapper" or "host" anymore, but can directly be attached to the main React tree by the app shell.

Reviewer 2: This sounds like we should have either another RFC replacing the current styleguide RFC or a link from that RFC noting that it is updated by this RFC.

Author: Its just a possibility. And the given example (notifications) is a simple implementation change; right now its already using React, but does a `render`. Now it could just stay a component and be mounted by the app shell, which makes the whole model more consistent.
